# A computational framework for estimating firing rates in single-unit single-trial spike data: application shows Parkinsonian state is closer to criticality than healthy controls in Basal Ganglia <br/>

## Richard R. Foster $^{a,b}$ , Cheng Ly $^{a}$ <br />
### $^a$ _Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond VA 23284_ <br />
### $^b$ _Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI 48109 <br />_

## Description

This work implements a framework for determining the difference in proximity to criticality between healthy and Parkinsonian single-unit, spike time recordings in the basal ganglia. This repository is structured as follows:

1. ISI (Interspike Intervals): This folder contains code that collects recorded interspike intervals from acquired data (gpedata.mat, gpidata.mat, stndata.mat) and uses maximum likelihood estimation to fit a family of candidate distributions. Goodness-of-fit of each distribution type is then saved in resulting mat files.
2. OKS (Optimal Kernel Smoothing): This folder contains code that smooths binned spike trains into continuous representations of a neuron's firing rate using a kernel-based smoothing approach. Each kernel has an associated bandwidth, which determines the smoothness of the resulting firing rate estimate. Using the framework in "Kernel bandwidth optimization in spike rate estimation" by Shimazaki and Shinomoto (2010), we implemented a cost function minimization approach that identifies an "optimal" bandwidth. Assumes an inhomogeneous Poisson process for spike generation.
3. BAKS (Bayesian Adaptive Kernel Smoothing): This folder contains code that smooths binned spike trains into a continuous firing rate signal by supposing a time-varying bandwidth, which allows for the rate function to adapt to changing spiking behaviors (tonic firing, bursting, long periods of quiescence). Using the framework in "Estimation of neuronal firing rate using Bayesian Adaptive Kernel Smoother (BAKS)" by Ahmadi et al. (2018) with a mixed Gamma prior distribution over the precision parameter (related to the bandwidth) and a comprehensive Bayesian hyperparameter estimation scheme (leave-one-out cross validation and likelihood maximization), we construct and collect resulting firing rate signals. 
4. BSS (Bayesian State-Space): This folder contains code that produces continuous firing rate and irregularity signals by supposing they are latent, time-varying variables in a Bayesian framework. This code is based on the work in "Estimating instantaneous irregularity of neuronal firing" by Shimokawa and Shinomoto (2009), but with extensive updates to the framework (BVP solution-based method for MAP estimates of the latent states, rigorous computational augments that ensure numerical stability, etc.). This folder also contains code that takes the best-performing rates across the different rate estimation methods (OKS, BAKS, BSS) and calculates that proximity to criticality.
5. TRT (Time-Rescaling Theorem): This folder contains code that determines the goodness-of-fit of each firing rate to the observed data (e.g. interspike intervals, spike times) by assuming the rate function informs on either an inhomogeneous Poisson or Gamma renewal process (if the irregularity is provided or globally estimated). Best performing models are used in proximity to criticality analysis.
